# Chapter 2. The Tensor Concept

Scalars: **tensors of rank 0**. Vectors: **tensors of rank 1**. Since their specifications
in any coordinate system require $3^n$ numbers, called **components**.

Tensor is more than just a collection of numbers. Key property is the **transformation law**
of its components: The way components in one coordinate system relate to components in another
coordinate system. The transformation law is a consequence of the geometric or physical
meaning of the tensor.

Properly formulated physical laws are invariant under shifts and rotations of the coordinate system.


### 2.2 Zero Order Tensors (Scalars)

Scalars are quantities uniquely defined by a single number and **invariant under
coordinate system changes**.

**Examples:** Let $A$ and $B$ be two points in space, and let $\delta s$ be the distance
between them. Then $\delta s$ is a scalar.

For the time being, we confine ourselves to the rectangular coordinate systems.

Tensors written in rectangular coordinates are called **Cartesian tensors**.

### 2.3 First Order Tensors (Vectors)

By a **vector** we mean a quantity specified in any coordinate system by three
real numbers (_components_) which transform under coordinate system changes
according to the law:

$$
A'_{i} = \alpha_{i'k} A_{k} \tag{2.2}
$$

where $A_{k}$, $A'_{i}$ are the components of the vector in the old and new
coordinate systems $K$ and $K'$, respectively, and $\alpha_{i'k}$ are the
cosines of the angles between the $i$-th axis of $K'$ and the $k$-th axis of $K$.

This definition is equivalent to the definition of a vector as a directed line segment,
but has the advantage of being easily generalizable to arbitrary order tensors.

### 2.4 Second Order Tensors

By a **second order tensor** we mean a quantity uniquely specified nine real numbers
(_components_) which transform under coordinate system changes according to the law:

$$
A'_{ik} = \alpha_{i'l} \alpha_{k'm} A_{lm} \tag{2.4}
$$

where $A_{lm}$, $A'_{ik}$ are the components of the tensor in the old and new
coordinate systems $K$ and $K'$, respectively, and $\alpha_{i'l}$ is the cosine
of the angle between the $i$-th axis of $K'$ and the $l$-th axis of $K$.

The components of a second order tensor are often written as a matrix:

$$
\lVert A_{ik} \rVert =
\left \lVert
\begin{array}{ccc}
A_{11} & A_{12} & A_{13} \\
A_{21} & A_{22} & A_{23} \\
A_{31} & A_{32} & A_{33}
\end{array}
\right \rVert
$$
