# Spacetime Physics, Chapter 3

### 3.1 The Principle of Relativity

Roughly speaking, the Principle of Relativity states says that without looking out
the window, you cannot tell which reference frame you are in or how fast you are moving.

**Galileo's Principle of Relativity**: Shut yourself up in a cabin below decks on a
ship, and you cannot tell whether the ship is at rest or moving uniformly straight
ahead.

**Extension of Galileo's reasoning from ship to spaceship**: In Galileo's account
the frames of reference are not yet free-float (inertial). To make them so requires
only a small conceptual step: from two uniformly moving sea-going ships to two
unpowered spaceships.

Then, up and down, north and south, east and west, all become alike.

This identity of the law of free motion in all inertial reference frames is what
one means today by the **Galilean Principle of Relativity**.

**Einstein's Principle of Relativity**: The laws of physics are the same in all
free-float (inertial) reference frames.

**Principle of Relativity, negative form**: No test of the laws of physics provides
any way whatsoever to distinguish one free-float frame from another.

### 3.2 What is not the same in different frames

Notice what the Principle of Relativity does not say:
- It does not say that the time between two events is the same when measured in different
  free-float frames.
- It does not say that the space separation between two events is the same when measured
  in different free-float frames.

Consequently, observers in different free-float frames don't necessarily agree on the
following:

- Velocity
- Acceleration
- Force
- Electric and magnetic fields

### 3.3 What is the same in different frames

**Laws of physics** are the same in all free-float frames. For example, how force
and acceleration are related. Or laws of electromagnetism.

**Fundamental constants** are the same. Otherwise, two different frames could be
distinguished by measuring the constant.

**Speed of light** is the same in all free-float frames in uniform relative motion.

